{%p if need_safety_info_TF %}

# Stay safe {#stay-safe}

## Tell the police {#tell-the-police}

**If you are in immediate danger, call 911.**

Tell your concerns to your local law enforcement.You can find your local
police department non-emergency phone numbers on-line.

-   State Trooper Locations and Phone Numbers

-   Village Public Safety Officer Locations and Phone Numbers

## Find help near you {#find-help-near-you}

Find a Domestic Violence Program in Your Area to learn about what
services they offer (counseling, financial assistance, housing and safe
shelter, resources for children, and help with court).

## More resources {#more-resources}

-   Learn more about recognizing domestic violence from the The National
    Coalition Against Domestic Violence or Abuse Defined (National
    Domestic Violence Hotline).

-   Create a Safety Plan using Safety Planning Tips (things you can do
    to keep yourself safe).

-   Find more resources from the National Domestic Violence The National
    Domestic Violence Hotline or call 1-800-799-7233.

{%p endif %}

{%p if register_foreign_order_TF %}

# Register a protective order from another state or tribal court {#register-a-protective-order-from-another-state-or-tribal-court}

**How to Register:** Bring a certified copy of your order to the court
to file it for free.Then it will be recognized as a valid order in
Alaska and the police can enforce it.The court clerk will send a copy of
the order to Alaska law enforcement who will enter it into their system.
They will not give the other side a copy of the protective order or tell
him or her that you have filed the order with the Alaska court.

**Find the Closest Alaska Courthouse to file your order.**

**Did you know:** A protective order from another state or tribal court
is often called a “foreign order.”

## Get more information or help {#get-more-information-or-help}

-   For help with the forms or understanding the process, contact the
    Family Law Self-Help Center:

-   \(907\) 264-0851 or (866) 279-0851 on an Alaska-based phone outside
    of Anchorage, or

-   Alaska Court System Family Law Self-Help Center

-   Find a Domestic Violence Program in Your Area.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Your Local Domestic
    Violence Program.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Alaska Legal Services.

{%p endif %}

{%p if protective_order_court == 'military' %}

# Review resources for military dependents {#review-resources-for-military-dependents}

## Military specific options {#military-specific-options}

**Military Protective Orders**:The military can issue their own
protective orders to protect victims of domestic violence, which are
different than protective orders from state courts.A spouse, ex-spouse,
or current or former boyfriend or girlfriend of an active duty service
member can get a military protective order (MPO) to protect them from
domestic violence. A victim, victim advocate, installation law
enforcement agency, or FAP clinician can ask a commander to issue an
MPO.

**Early Return of Dependents**: If you are a military dependent you may
be eligible for what the military refers to as an "Early/Advance Return
of Dependents." This is a military policy that allows dependents to
return to their home of origin at the military's expense. This is
available to military dependents **ONLY ONCE** and includes the shipment
of household goods.

## Get more information or help {#get-more-information-or-help-1}

-   Family Advocacy Program for Military Family Members (or listed in
    your installations phone book)

-   Military OneSource: Resources for Military Members and Military
    Family Members Experiencing Domestic Violence and Abuse

-   Contact the Family Law Self-Help Center:

    -   \(907\) 264-0851 or (866) 279-0851 on an Alaska-based phone
        outside of Anchorage, or

-   Alaska Court System Family Law Self-Help Center

-   Legal Information about Domestic Violence in the Military

{%p endif %}

{%p if protective_order_court == 'tribal' %}

# Review resources for tribal members {#review-resources-for-tribal-members}

If you or the other person are tribal members, you may qualify for a
protective order from the tribal court.To find out if your tribal court
offers protective orders, contact your tribe.If your tribe does not
offer tribal protective orders, you can ask the Alaska court for a
protective order.

## Find local resources {#find-local-resources}

-   Find tribe contact information in the 2018 Alaska Tribal Court
    Directory*.*

-   Find statewide and regional information on programs in the Alaska
    Native Tribal Health Consortium's Regional Resource Guides.These
    guides provide statewide and regional information on programs for
    domestic violence, sexual violence and coercion, child abuse and
    neglect, and vulnerable adult/elder abuse.These guides are intended
    for people who have survived abuse, for those who have committed
    abuse, and for anyone interested in preventing abuse and promoting
    wellness.

-   Find a list of Alaska's Tribal Health Care Organizations which
    operate Alaska’s tribal healthcare facilities.

{%p endif %}

{%p if protective_order_information_TF %}

# Ask for a domestic violence protective order for 1 person {#ask-for-a-domestic-violence-protective-order-for-1-person}

Based on your answers, asking for a domestic violence protective order
may be appropriate.

## Pick the length of time you want to ask for {#pick-the-length-of-time-you-want-to-ask-for}

A **short-term domestic violence protective order** lasts 20 days if the
court grants it.The person asking for a protective order is called the
"petitioner."The court only considers the petitioner's information when
deciding whether to issue a short-term order.To protect the petitioner's
safety, the court does not contact the other side when deciding whether
to issue a short-term order.But if the court issues the order, law
enforcement will give the other side a copy of the protective order and
explain what it says.A short-term protective order is also called an ex
parte protective order.

A **long-term domestic violence protective order** lasts 1 year if the
court grants it.You can ask for a long-term protective order when you
ask for a short-term protective order.Law enforcement will notify the
other side that you asked for the long-term order and that there will be
a court hearing in about 20 days.Both sides can testify at the hearing
where the judge will decide whether to issue the long-term protective
order.

Most people ask for **both** short-term and long-term protective orders.
However, each situation is different, so think about what timeline makes
the most sense for your situation.

Pick which one you want, or both, by checking boxes on the petition form
you fill out asking for a protective order.

## Choose how you want to fill out the forms to ask the court for a domestic violence protective order {#choose-how-you-want-to-fill-out-the-forms-to-ask-the-court-for-a-domestic-violence-protective-order}

Fill out:

-   Petition for Domestic Violence Protective Order(s) (one petitioner)

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (One Petitioner)

Or answer questions on-line and print the results using:

-   Online Wizard to Request a Protective Order (domestic violence,
    stalking, or sexual assault)

## Get help with the forms {#get-help-with-the-forms}

-   Read How to Get a Domestic Violence Protective Order.

-   Contact the Family Law Self-Help Center:

-   \(907\) 264-0851 or (866) 279-0851 on an Alaska-based phone outside
    of Anchorage, or

-   Alaska Court System Family Law Self-Help Center

-   Find a Domestic Violence Program in Your Area.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Your Local Domestic
    Violence Program.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Alaska Legal Services.

## Make a copy of your petition for your own records  {#make-a-copy-of-your-petition-for-your-own-records}

## File the original with your local court {#file-the-original-with-your-local-court}

Find the Closest Alaska Courthouse to file your petition.

## Learn more about the process {#learn-more-about-the-process}

-   Watch a video about the forms, court hearings, and safety planning:

    -   Domestic Violence Protective Orders Video - English

    -   Video sobre órdenes de protección de violencia doméstica
        > (Domestic Violence Protective Orders Video - Español)

    -   Ilakutellriit wallu nelgutkellriit, callualriit wallu
        > inglukutellriit tangvarkaq (Domestic Violence Protective
        > Orders Video - Yup'ik)

-   Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence
    Protective Order Process.

{%p endif%}

{%p if protective_order_information_more_than_1\_person_TF %}

# Ask for a domestic violence protective order for more than 1 person {#ask-for-a-domestic-violence-protective-order-for-more-than-1-person}

Based on your answers, asking for a domestic violence protective order
may be appropriate.

## Pick the length of time you want to ask for {#pick-the-length-of-time-you-want-to-ask-for-1}

A **short-term domestic violence protective order** lasts 20 days if the
court grants it.The person asking for a protective order is called the
"petitioner."The court only considers the petitioner's information when
deciding whether to issue a short-term order.To protect the petitioner's
safety, the court does not contact the other side when deciding whether
to issue a short-term order.But if the court issues the order, law
enforcement will give the other side a copy of the protective order and
explain what it says.A short-term protective order is also called an ex
parte protective order.

A **long-term domestic violence protective order** lasts 1 year if the
court grants it.You can ask for a long-term protective order when you
ask for a short-term protective order.Law enforcement will notify the
other side that you asked for the long-term order and that there will be
a court hearing in about 20 days.Both sides can testify at the hearing
where the judge will decide whether to issue the long-term protective
order.

Most people ask for **both** short-term and long-term protective orders.
However, each situation is different, so think about what timeline makes
the most sense for your situation.

Pick which one you want, or both, by checking boxes on the petition form
you fill out asking for a protective order.

## Choose how you want to fill out the forms to ask the court for a domestic violence protective order {#choose-how-you-want-to-fill-out-the-forms-to-ask-the-court-for-a-domestic-violence-protective-order-1}

Fill out:

-   Petition for Domestic Violence Protective Order(s) (one petitioner)

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (One Petitioner)

Or answer questions on-line and print the results using:

-   Online Wizard to Request a Protective Order (domestic violence,
    stalking, or sexual assault)

## Get help with the forms {#get-help-with-the-forms-1}

Read How to Get a Domestic Violence Protective Order.

Contact the Family Law Self-Help Center:

-   \(907\) 264-0851 or (866) 279-0851 on an Alaska-based phone outside
    of Anchorage, or

-   Alaska Court System Family Law Self-Help Center

Find a Domestic Violence Program in Your Area.

See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Your Local Domestic
Violence Program.

See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Alaska Legal Services.

## Make a copy of your petition for your own records  {#make-a-copy-of-your-petition-for-your-own-records-1}

## File the original with your local court {#file-the-original-with-your-local-court-1}

Find the Closest Alaska Courthouse to file your petition.

## Learn more about the process  {#learn-more-about-the-process-1}

-   Watch a video about the forms, court hearings, and safety planning:

    -   Domestic Violence Protective Orders Video - English

    -   Video sobre órdenes de protección de violencia doméstica
        > (Domestic Violence Protective Orders Video - Español)

    -   Ilakutellriit wallu nelgutkellriit, callualriit wallu
        > inglukutellriit tangvarkaq (Domestic Violence Protective
        > Orders Video - Yup'ik)

-   Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence
    Protective Order Process.

{%p endif %}

{%p if ask_for_a\_stalking_PO_TF %}

# Ask for a stalking protective order {#ask-for-a-stalking-protective-order}

Based on your answers, asking for a stalking protective order may be
appropriate.

## Pick the length of time you want to ask for {#pick-the-length-of-time-you-want-to-ask-for-2}

A **short-term sexual assault protective order** lasts 20 days if the
court grants it.The person asking for a protective order is called the
"petitioner."The court only considers the petitioner's information when
deciding whether to issue a short-term order.To protect the petitioner's
safety, the court does not contact the other side when deciding whether
to issue a short-term order.But if the court issues the order, law
enforcement will give the other side a copy of the protective order and
explain what it says.A short-term protective order is also called an ex
parte protective order.

A **long-term sexual assault protective order** lasts 1 year if the
court grants it.You can ask for a long-term protective order when you
ask for a short-term protective order.Law enforcement will notify the
other side that you asked for the long-term order and that there will be
a court hearing in about 20 days.Both sides can testify at the hearing
where the judge will decide whether to issue the long-term protective
order.

Most people ask for **both** short-term and long-term protective orders.
However, each situation is different, so think about what timeline makes
the most sense for your situation.

Pick which one you want, or both, by checking boxes on the petition form
you fill out asking for a protective order.

## Choose how you want to fill out the forms to ask the court for a stalking protective order {#choose-how-you-want-to-fill-out-the-forms-to-ask-the-court-for-a-stalking-protective-order}

Fill out (the same form is used for sexual assault and stalking
protective orders so check the box for "stalking"):

-   Petition for Stalking or Sexual Assault Protective Order

-   Confidential Law Enforcement Information Worksheet

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (One Petitioner)

Or answer questions on-line and print the results using:

-   Online Wizard to Request a Protective Order (domestic violence,
    stalking, or sexual assault)

## Get help with the forms {#get-help-with-the-forms-2}

-   Read Instructions for Requesting a Protective Order Against Stalking
    or Sexual Assault*.*

-   Find a Domestic Violence Program in Your Area.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Your Local Domestic
    Violence Program.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Alaska Legal Services.

## Make a copy of your petition for your own records  {#make-a-copy-of-your-petition-for-your-own-records-2}

## File the original with your local court {#file-the-original-with-your-local-court-2}

Find the Closest Alaska Courthouse to file your petition.

## Learn more about the process {#learn-more-about-the-process-2}

Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective
Order Process. This booklet focuses on domestic violence protective
orders but the information will be helpful. The main difference is that
you will need to tell the court about the other side's stalking
behavior.

{%p endif %}

{%p if ask_for_a\_so_po_TF %}

# Ask for a sexual assault protective order {#ask-for-a-sexual-assault-protective-order}

Based on your answers, asking for a sexual assault protective order may
be appropriate.

## Pick the length of time you want to ask for {#pick-the-length-of-time-you-want-to-ask-for-3}

A **short-term sexual assault protective order** lasts 20 days if the
court grants it.The person asking for a protective order is called the
"petitioner."The court only considers the petitioner's information when
deciding whether to issue a short-term order.To protect the petitioner's
safety, the court does not contact the other side when deciding whether
to issue a short-term order.But if the court issues the order, law
enforcement will give the other side a copy of the protective order and
explain what it says.A short-term protective order is also called an ex
parte protective order.

A **long-term sexual assault protective order** lasts 1 year if the
court grants it.You can ask for a long-term protective order when you
ask for a short-term protective order.Law enforcement will notify the
other side that you asked for the long-term order and that there will be
a court hearing in about 20 days.Both sides can testify at the hearing
where the judge will decide whether to issue the long-term protective
order.

Most people ask for **both** short-term and long-term protective orders.
However, each situation is different, so think about what timeline makes
the most sense for your situation.

Pick which one you want, or both, by checking boxes on the petition form
you fill out asking for a protective order.

## Choose how you want to fill out the forms to ask the court for a sexual assault protective order {#choose-how-you-want-to-fill-out-the-forms-to-ask-the-court-for-a-sexual-assault-protective-order}

Fill out (the same form is used for sexual assault and stalking
protective orders so check the box for "sexual assault"):

-   Petition for Stalking or Sexual Assault Protective Order

-   Confidential Law Enforcement Information Worksheet

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (One Petitioner)

Or answer questions on-line and print the results using:

-   Online Wizard to Request a Protective Order (domestic violence,
    stalking, or sexual assault)

## Get help with the forms {#get-help-with-the-forms-3}

-   Read Instructions for Requesting a Protective Order Against Stalking
    or Sexual Assault.

-   Find a Domestic Violence Program in Your Area.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Your Local Domestic
    Violence Program.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Alaska Legal Services.

## Make a copy of your petition for your own records  {#make-a-copy-of-your-petition-for-your-own-records-3}

## File the original with your local court {#file-the-original-with-your-local-court-3}

Find the Closest Alaska Courthouse to file your petition.

## Learn more about the process {#learn-more-about-the-process-3}

Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective
Order Process.This booklet focuses on domestic violence protective
orders but the information will be helpful.The main difference is that
you will need to tell the court about the other side's sexual assault
behavior.

{%p endif %}

{%p if child_with_other_side_Info_TF %}

# Think about parenting issues  {#think-about-parenting-issues}

If you have any children with the other party in a domestic violence
protective order case, the judge may make a parenting schedule as part
of the protective order.

## Think about a schedule before your protective order hearing {#think-about-a-schedule-before-your-protective-order-hearing}

-   Read: Frequently Asked Questions About Visitation When There is DV
    [PDF]\| Frequently Asked Questions About Visitation When There is
    DV [Word]

-   Fill out a worksheet to organize what you want to ask the judge for
    in court: Visitation Plan and Child Support Worksheet [PDF] \|
    Visitation Plan and Child Support Worksheet [Word]

## Start a divorce or custody case if you want a permanent parenting plan (also called a "custody order") {#start-a-divorce-or-custody-case-if-you-want-a-permanent-parenting-plan-also-called-a-custody-order}

If the judge includes a parenting schedule in the protective order, it
only lasts as long as the protective order, which is up to 1 year. To
avoid a time without a parenting plan, you can ask the court for a
separate parenting plan by filing a case in court. Which forms you use
depend on whether you are married to the other parent.

-   If you are married to the other parent, you can ask the court for a
    custody order through a divorce or dissolution case. Get information
    about starting a case by answering more questions. If you want to
    save this Action Plan, be sure to download, save, or print it. You
    can then return to the Guided Assistant page and use the Guided
    Assistant search box to find "Starting a Case to End Your Marriage."

-   If you are not married to the other parent, you can ask the court
    for a custody order through a custody case. Get information about
    starting a custody case by answering more questions. If you want to
    save this Action Plan, be sure to download, save, or print it. You
    can then return to the Guided Assistant page and use the Guided
    Assistant search box to find "Starting a Custody Case."

{%p endif %}

{%p if safety_info_when_dont_qualify_TF %}

# Review options for when you may not qualify for a protective order {#review-options-for-when-you-may-not-qualify-for-a-protective-order}

## Stay safe {#stay-safe-1}

Based on your answers, you may not qualify for a protective order. To
figure out a plan to keep yourself safe, review *Stay Safe* above.

## Ask for a protective order {#ask-for-a-protective-order}

If something changes, there is a new incident, or you decide to ask the
court now for a protective order, use the Guided Assistant again or
follow these steps:

## Pick which type of protective order is appropriate {#pick-which-type-of-protective-order-is-appropriate}

A <u>domestic violence protective order</u> may be an option if someone
who is a relative, roommate, or intimate partner committed domestic
violence against you.

A <u>stalking protective order</u> may be an option if you were
repeatedly contacted without consent by someone who is not a relative,
roommate, or intimate partner in a way that caused you fear of physical
injury or death to self or a family member.

A <u>sexual assault protective order</u> may be an option if someone who
is not a relative, roommate, or intimate partner had sexual contact with
you without your consent.

## Pick the length of time you want to ask for {#pick-the-length-of-time-you-want-to-ask-for-4}

A **short-term protective order** lasts 20 days if the court grants
it.The person asking for a protective order is called the
"petitioner."The court only considers the petitioner's information when
deciding whether to issue a short-term order.To protect the petitioner's
safety, the court does not contact the other side when deciding whether
to issue a short-term order.But if the court issues the order, law
enforcement will give the other side a copy of the protective order and
explain what it says.A short-term protective order is also called an ex
parte protective order.

A **long-term protective order** lasts 1 year if the court grants it.You
can ask for a long-term protective order when you ask for a short-term
protective order.Law enforcement will notify the other side that you
asked for the long-term order and that there will be a court hearing in
about 20 days.Both sides can testify at the hearing where the judge will
decide whether to issue the long-term protective order.

Most people ask for **both** short-term and long-term protective orders.
However, each situation is different, so think about what timeline makes
the most sense for your situation.

Pick which one you want, or both, by checking boxes on the petition form
you fill out asking for a protective order.

##  Pick the right forms to ask the court for a protective order {#pick-the-right-forms-to-ask-the-court-for-a-protective-order}

Select the forms for the type of protective order you want.

### Domestic Violence Protective Orders for 1 Person {#domestic-violence-protective-orders-for-1-person}

Fill out:

-   Petition for Domestic Violence Protective Order(s) (one petitioner)

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (One Petitioner)

Or answer questions on-line and print the results using:

-   Online Wizard to Request a Protective Order (domestic violence,
    stalking, or sexual assault)

### Domestic Violence Protective Orders for More Than 1 Person {#domestic-violence-protective-orders-for-more-than-1-person}

Fill out:

-   Petition for Domestic Violence Protective Order(s) (multiple
    petitioners)

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (Multiple Petitioners)

### Stalking or Sexual Assault Protective Orders {#stalking-or-sexual-assault-protective-orders}

Fill out (the same form is used for sexual assault and stalking
protective orders so check the box for your situation):

-   Petition for Stalking or Sexual Assault Protective Order

-   Confidential Law Enforcement Information Worksheet

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (One Petitioner)

Or answer questions on-line and print the results using:

-   Online Wizard to Request a Protective Order (domestic violence,
    stalking, or sexual assault)

## Get help with the forms {#get-help-with-the-forms-4}

-   Read instructions for the type of order you are requesting:

    -   How to Get a Domestic Violence Protective Order

    -   Instructions for Requesting a Protective Order Against Stalking
        > or Sexual Assault

-   Find a Domestic Violence Program in Your Area.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Your Local Domestic
    Violence Program.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Alaska Legal Services.

## Make a copy of your petition for your own records  {#make-a-copy-of-your-petition-for-your-own-records-4}

## File the original with your local court {#file-the-original-with-your-local-court-4}

Find the Closest Alaska Courthouse to file your petition.

## Learn more about the process {#learn-more-about-the-process-4}

-   Watch a video about the forms, court hearings, and safety planning:

    -   Domestic Violence Protective Orders Video - English

    -   Video sobre órdenes de protección de violencia doméstica
        > (Domestic Violence Protective Orders Video - Español)

    -   Ilakutellriit wallu nelgutkellriit, callualriit wallu
        > inglukutellriit tangvarkaq (Domestic Violence Protective
        > Orders Video - Yup'ik)

-   Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence
    Protective Order Process.

{%p endif %}

{%p if prepare_for_long_term_hearing_TF%}

# Prepare for your long-term protective order hearing {#prepare-for-your-long-term-protective-order-hearing}

## Read {#read}

Prepare for your long-term hearing by reading How to Represent Yourself
in Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective Order Process, which focuses on
domestic violence protective orders. If you are asking for a long-term
stalking or sexual assault protective order, the information will be
helpful. The main difference is that you will need to tell the court
about the other side's stalking or sexual assault behavior.

## Get more information or help {#get-more-information-or-help-2}

-   See if You Qualify for A Free Lawyer Through Your Local Domestic
    Violence Program.

-   See if You Qualify for A Free Lawyer Through Alaska Legal Services.

{%p endif %}

{%p if other_side_violated_order_TF %}

# Review options for when the protective order is violated {#review-options-for-when-the-protective-order-is-violated}

## Call the police: if you are in immediate danger, call 911.  {#call-the-police-if-you-are-in-immediate-danger-call-911.}

It is a misdemeanor crime to violate most parts of a protective order.
You can call the police to report the crime. Common examples of criminal
violations:

-   committing or threatening to commit domestic violence;

-   contacting the victim;

-   entering or following the victim's home or vehicle.

## Tell the court**:** you can tell the court about the violation and ask for more restrictions by filing a request to modify the protective order.  {#tell-the-court-you-can-tell-the-court-about-the-violation-and-ask-for-more-restrictions-by-filing-a-request-to-modify-the-protective-order.}

###  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form}

-   If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Request to
    Modify a Protective Order (one petitioner)*.*

-   If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out
    Request to Modify a Protective Order (multiple petitioners).

### Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the protective
    order.

-   Check boxes telling the court you are the petitioner & whether you
    want to change (modify) a short-term or long-term protective order.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

### File the form {#file-the-form}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the respondent so you do not
    need to serve the respondent yourself.

### Follow the Protective Order {#follow-the-protective-order}

-   You must follow the protective order until the court signs an order
    changing it.

-   The court may or may not hold a hearing.

-   If the court signs a new order, you will get a copy.

-   If the court does not change the protective order, you must follow
    it until it expires, even if you and the other side both want to
    change it.

## Get more information {#get-more-information}

Read more about violations and enforcement in How to Represent Yourself
in Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective Order Process.

{%p endif %}

{%p if end_protective_order_TF%}

# Ask to end a protective order {#ask-to-end-a-protective-order}

##  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form-1}

-   If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Request to
    Dissolve a Protective Order (one petitioner).

-   If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out
    Request to Dissolve a Protective Order (multiple petitioners).

## Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form-1}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the protective
    order.

-   Check boxes telling the court you are the petitioner & whether you
    want to end (dissolve) a short-term or long-term protective order.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

## File the form {#file-the-form-1}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the respondent so you do not
    need to serve the respondent yourself.

## Follow the protective order {#follow-the-protective-order-1}

-   You must follow the protective order until the court signs an order
    ending it.

-   The court may or may not hold a hearing.

-   If the court signs a new order, you will get a copy.

-   If the court does not end the protective order, you must follow it
    until it expires, even if you and the other side both want to end
    it.

## Get more information {#get-more-information-1}

Read about ending a protective order in How to Represent Yourself in
Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective Order Process.

{%p endif %}

{%p if change_protective_order_TF %}

# Ask to change a protective order {#ask-to-change-a-protective-order}

##  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form-2}

-   If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Request to
    Modify a Protective Order (one petitioner).

-   If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out
    Request to Modify a Protective Order (multiple petitioners).

## Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form-2}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the protective
    order.

-   Check boxes telling the court you are the petitioner & whether you
    want to change (modify) a short-term or long-term protective order.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

## File the form {#file-the-form-2}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the respondent so you do not
    need to serve the respondent yourself.

## Follow the protective order {#follow-the-protective-order-2}

-   You must follow the protective order until the court signs an order
    changing it.

-   The court may or may not hold a hearing.

-   If the court signs a new order, you will get a copy.

-   If the court does not change the protective order, you must follow
    it until it expires, even if you and the other side both want to
    change it.

## Get more information {#get-more-information-2}

Read about changing a protective order in How to Represent Yourself in
Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective Order Process.

{%p endif %}

{%p if respond_PO_change_end_TF %}

# Respond to a request to modify or dissolve the protective order {#respond-to-a-request-to-modify-or-dissolve-the-protective-order}

##  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form-3}

-   If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Response to
    Request to Modify, Extend, or Dissolve a Protective Order (one
    petitioner).

-   If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out
    Response to Request to Modify, Extend, or Dissolve a Protective
    Order (multiple petitioners).

## Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form-3}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the request.

-   Check boxes telling the court:

    -   you are the petitioner,

    -   whether you are responding to a request to modify, extend, or
        > dissolve the protective order, and

    -   whether you agree with or oppose the request.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

## File the form {#file-the-form-3}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the respondent so you do not
    need to serve the respondent yourself.

## Follow the protective order {#follow-the-protective-order-3}

-   You must follow the protective order until the court signs an order
    changing it.

-   The court may or may not hold a hearing.

-   If the court signs a new order, you will get a copy.

-   If the court does not change the protective order, you must follow
    it until it expires, even if you and the other side both want to
    change it.

## Get more information {#get-more-information-3}

Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective
Order Process.

{%p endif %}

{%p if extend_after_60_days_TF %}

# Review options if your protective order expired more than 60 days ago {#review-options-if-your-protective-order-expired-more-than-60-days-ago}

## Stay safe {#stay-safe-2}

If your protective order expired more than 60 days ago, it cannot be
extended. If you want to ask for a <u>new</u> protective order, follow
the steps below. If there hasn't been a new domestic violence incident,
the court may not give you another protective order. To figure out a
plan to stay safe, review the section of your Action Plan called *Stay
Safe* above*.*

## Ask for a new protective order {#ask-for-a-new-protective-order}

If you decide to ask the court for a new protective order, use the
Guided Assistant again or follow the steps below.

## Pick which type of protective order is appropriate {#pick-which-type-of-protective-order-is-appropriate-1}

A <u>domestic violence protective order</u> may be an option if someone
who is a relative, roommate, or intimate partner committed domestic
violence against you.

A <u>stalking protective order</u> may be an option if you were
repeatedly contacted without consent by someone who is not a relative,
roommate, or intimate partner in a way that caused you fear of physical
injury or death to self or a family member.

A <u>sexual assault protective order</u> may be an option if someone who
is not a relative, roommate, or intimate partner had sexual contact with
you without your consent.

## Pick the length of time you want to ask for {#pick-the-length-of-time-you-want-to-ask-for-5}

A **short-term protective order** lasts 20 days if the court grants
it.The person asking for a protective order is called the
"petitioner."The court only considers the petitioner's information when
deciding whether to issue a short-term order.To protect the petitioner's
safety, the court does not contact the other side when deciding whether
to issue a short-term order.But if the court issues the order, law
enforcement will give the other side a copy of the protective order and
explain what it says.A short-term protective order is also called an ex
parte protective order.

A **long-term protective order** lasts 1 year if the court grants it.You
can ask for a long-term protective order when you ask for a short-term
protective order.Law enforcement will notify the other side that you
asked for the long-term order and that there will be a court hearing in
about 20 days.Both sides can testify at the hearing where the judge will
decide whether to issue the long-term protective order.

Most people ask for **both** short-term and long-term protective orders.
However, each situation is different, so think about what timeline makes
the most sense for your situation.

Pick which one you want, or both, by checking boxes on the petition form
you fill out asking for a protective order.

##  Pick the right forms to ask the court for a protective order {#pick-the-right-forms-to-ask-the-court-for-a-protective-order-1}

Select the forms for the type of protective order you want.

### Domestic Violence Protective Orders for 1 person  {#domestic-violence-protective-orders-for-1-person-1}

Fill out:

-   Petition for Domestic Violence Protective Order(s) (one petitioner)

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (One Petitioner)

Or answer questions on-line and print the results using:

-   Online Wizard to Request a Protective Order (domestic violence,
    stalking, or sexual assault)

### Domestic Violence Protective Orders for More Than 1 person {#domestic-violence-protective-orders-for-more-than-1-person-1}

Fill out:

-   Petition for Domestic Violence Protective Order(s) (multiple
    petitioners)

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (Multiple Petitioners)

### Stalking or Sexual Assault Protective Orders {#stalking-or-sexual-assault-protective-orders-1}

Fill out (the same form is used for sexual assault and stalking
protective orders so check the box for your situation):

-   Petition for Stalking or Sexual Assault Protective Order

-   Confidential Law Enforcement Information Worksheet

-   Request for Service of Protective Order Documents and Peace
    Officer's Return of Service (One Petitioner)

Or answer questions on-line and print the results using:

-   Online Wizard to Request a Protective Order (domestic violence,
    stalking, or sexual assault)

## Get help with the forms {#get-help-with-the-forms-5}

-   Read instructions for the type of order you are requesting:

    -   How to Get a Domestic Violence Protective Order

    -   Instructions for Requesting a Protective Order Against Stalking
        > or Sexual Assault.

-   Find a Domestic Violence Program in Your Area.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Your Local Domestic
    Violence Program.

-   See if You Qualify For A Free Lawyer Through Alaska Legal Services.

## Make a copy of your petition for your own records  {#make-a-copy-of-your-petition-for-your-own-records-5}

## File the original with your local court {#file-the-original-with-your-local-court-5}

Find the Closest Alaska Courthouse to file your petition.

## Learn more about the process {#learn-more-about-the-process-5}

-   Watch a video about the forms, court hearings, and safety planning:

    -   Domestic Violence Protective Orders Video - English

    -   Video sobre órdenes de protección de violencia doméstica
        > (Domestic Violence Protective Orders Video - Español)

    -   Ilakutellriit wallu nelgutkellriit, callualriit wallu
        > inglukutellriit tangvarkaq (Domestic Violence Protective
        > Orders Video - Yup'ik)

-   Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence
    Protective Order Process*.*

{%p endif %}

{%p if extend_less_than_10_days_TF %}

# Ask to extend your protective order that expires in less than 10 days {#ask-to-extend-your-protective-order-that-expires-in-less-than-10-days}

## The process {#the-process}

-   The law allows a person to extend a protective order for up to 1
    year if the court finds an extension is necessary to protect the
    person from:

    -   domestic violence if the original protective order was for
        > domestic violence,

    -   sexual assault if your original protective order was for sexual
        > assault, or

    -   stalking if your original protective order was for stalking.

-   You can file a request for an extension 30 days before the
    protective order expires until 60 days after it expired.

-   The court will set a hearing at least 10 days after the request to
    hear both side's arguments.

## Stay safe {#stay-safe-3}

Because your protective order expires in less than 10 days, the hearing
will be after it expires.To figure out a plan to stay safe, review the
section of your Action Plan called *Stay Safe* above*.*

## Timing {#timing}

File your request as soon as possible to reduce the amount of time you
do not have a protective order.

## Fill out and file request to extend a protective order {#fill-out-and-file-request-to-extend-a-protective-order}

###  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form-4}

-   If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Request to
    Extend Protective Order (one petitioner).

-   If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out
    Request to Extend Protective Order (multiple petitioners).

### Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form-4}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the protective
    order.

-   Check the box telling the court you are the petitioner.

-   Write in the date the judge signed the protective order you want to
    extend.

-   Explain why extending the protective order is necessary to keep you
    safe.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

### File the form {#file-the-form-4}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the respondent so you do not
    need to serve the respondent yourself.

## Get more information {#get-more-information-4}

Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective
Order Process.

{%p endif %}

{%p if extend_more_than_10_days_TF %}

# Ask to extend your protective order that expires more than 10 days from now {#ask-to-extend-your-protective-order-that-expires-more-than-10-days-from-now}

## The process {#the-process-1}

-   The law allows a person to extend a protective order for up to 1
    year if the court finds an extension is necessary to protect the
    person from:

    -   domestic violence if the original protective order was for
        > domestic violence,

    -   sexual assault if your original protective order was for sexual
        > assault, or

    -   stalking if your original protective order was for stalking.

-   You can file a request for an extension 30 days before the
    protective order expires until 60 days after it expired.

-   The court will set a hearing at least 10 days after the request to
    hear both side's arguments.

## Timing {#timing-1}

File your request 30 days before your protective order expires, or as
soon after as possible.

Filing early gives the court more time to have the hearing before your
protective order expires.

## Fill out and file request to extend a protective order {#fill-out-and-file-request-to-extend-a-protective-order-1}

###  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form-5}

If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Request to Extend
Protective Order (one petitioner).

If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out Request to
Extend Protective Order (multiple petitioners).

### Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form-5}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the protective
    order.

-   Check the box telling the court you are the petitioner.

-   Write in the date the judge signed the protective order you want to
    extend.

-   Explain why extending the protective order is necessary to keep you
    safe.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

### File the form {#file-the-form-5}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the respondent so you do not
    need to serve the respondent yourself.

## Stay safe {#stay-safe-4}

If your protective order expires before your hearing, make a plan to
stay safe. Review the section of your Action Plan called *Stay Safe*
above*.*

## Get more information {#get-more-information-5}

Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective
Order Process.

{%p endif %}

{%p if extend_60_day_window_TF%}

# Ask to extend a protective order that expired less than 60 days ago {#ask-to-extend-a-protective-order-that-expired-less-than-60-days-ago}

## The process {#the-process-2}

The law allows a person to extend a protective order for up to 1 year if
the court finds an extension is necessary to protect the person from:

-   domestic violence if the original protective order was for domestic
    violence,

-   sexual assault if your original protective order was for sexual
    assault, or

-   stalking if your original protective order was for stalking.

You can file a request for an extension 30 days before the protective
order expires until 60 days after it expired.

The court will set a hearing at least 10 days after the request to hear
both side's arguments.

## Stay safe {#stay-safe-5}

Because your protective order expired, make a plan to stay safe. Review
the section of your Action Plan called *Stay Safe* above*.*

## Timing {#timing-2}

You only have 60 days after your protective order expires to file your
request, so do it as soon as possible and before 60 days have passed.

## Fill out and file request to extend a protective order {#fill-out-and-file-request-to-extend-a-protective-order-2}

###  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form-6}

-   If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Request to
    Extend Protective Order (one petitioner).

-   If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out
    Response to Request to Modify, Extend, or Dissolve a Protective
    Order (multiple petitioners).

### Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form-6}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the protective
    order.

-   Check the box telling the court you are the petitioner.

-   Write in the date the judge signed the protective order you want to
    extend.

-   Explain why extending the protective order is necessary to keep you
    safe.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

### File the form {#file-the-form-6}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the respondent so you do not
    need to serve the respondent yourself.

## Get more information {#get-more-information-6}

Read How to Represent Yourself in Alaska's Domestic Violence Protective
Order Process.

{%p endif %}

{%p if divorce_info_TF %}

# Start a case to end your marriage {#start-a-case-to-end-your-marriage}

You can ask the court to end your marriage through a divorce or
dissolution case.If you have children with your spouse, the divorce case
will include a parenting plan and a child support order. Get information
about starting a case by answering more questions. If you want to save
this Action Plan, be sure to download, save, or print it. You can then
return to the Guided Assistant page and use the Guided Assistant search
box to find "Starting a Case to End Your Marriage."

{%p endif %}

{%p if custody_case_information_TF %}

# Start a case for a parenting plan (also known as a "custody order") {#start-a-case-for-a-parenting-plan-also-known-as-a-custody-order}

If you are not married to the other parent, you can ask the court for
parenting plan, custody, and child support orders through a custody
case. Get information about starting a custody case by answering more
questions. If you want to save this Action Plan, be sure to download,
save, or print it. You can then return to the Guided Assistant page and
use the Guided Assistant search box to find "Starting a Custody Case."

{%p endif %}

{%p if have_protective_order_prepare_for_long_hearing_TF %}

# Prepare for your long-term protective order hearing {#prepare-for-your-long-term-protective-order-hearing-1}

## Read {#read-1}

Prepare for your long-term hearing by reading What to Do if Someone
Files a Protective Order Against You.

## Get more information or help {#get-more-information-or-help-3}

Learn about Services for People Who Commit Domestic Violence.

## Follow all court orders {#follow-all-court-orders}

One incident can result in several different court cases and more than
one order not to contact the other person.

If the police arrested you, you may have a criminal case. This is
separate from the protective order case.

If you violate the protective order, the police may arrest you. This
would be a new criminal case separate from any other criminal case or
the protective order case.

Each case might have different restrictions on what you can or cannot
do. You must follow all of them or risk getting arrested for a new crime
of violating one of the orders.

If the protective order is dismissed, that does not end the other cases.
You must still follow all orders in the other cases.

Be sure you understand what each order requires so you do not violate
any of them.

{%p endif %}

{%p if change_po_against_me_TF %}

# Ask to change a protective order against you {#ask-to-change-a-protective-order-against-you}

-   ##  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form-7}

<!-- -->

-   If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Request to
    Modify a Protective Order (one petitioner).

-   If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out
    Request to Modify a Protective Order (multiple petitioners).

## Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form-7}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the protective
    order.

-   Check boxes telling the court you are the respondent & whether you
    want to change (modify) a short-term or long-term protective order.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

## File the form {#file-the-form-7}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the petitioner so you do not
    need to serve the petitioner yourself.

## Follow the protective order {#follow-the-protective-order-4}

You must follow the protective order until the court signs an order
changing it or you risk getting arrested.

-   The court may or may not hold a hearing.

-   If the court signs a new order, you will get a copy.

-   If there is a separate criminal case against you that prohibits you
    from contacting the other person, do not contact that person or you
    risk getting arrested.

-   If the court does not change the protective order, you must follow
    it until it expires, even if you and the other side both want to
    change it.

## Get more information or help {#get-more-information-or-help-4}

-   Read about changing a protective order in What to Do if Someone
    Files a Protective Order Against You.

-   Learn about Services for People Who Commit Domestic Violence.

{%p endif %}

{%p if change_po_against_me_TF %}

# Ask to end a protective order against you {#ask-to-end-a-protective-order-against-you}

##  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form-8}

-   If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Request to
    Dissolve a Protective Order (one petitioner).

-   If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out
    Request to Dissolve a Protective Order (multiple petitioners).

## Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form-8}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the protective
    order.

-   Check boxes telling the court you are the respondent & whether you
    want to end (dissolve) a short-term or long-term protective order.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

## File the form {#file-the-form-8}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the petitioner so you do not
    need to serve the petitioner yourself.

## Follow the protective order {#follow-the-protective-order-5}

You must follow the protective order until the court signs an order
ending it or you risk getting arrested.

-   The court may or may not hold a hearing.

-   If the court signs a new order, you will get a copy.

-   If there is a separate criminal case against you that prohibits you
    from contacting the other person, do not contact that person or you
    risk getting arrested.

-   If the court does not end the protective order, you must follow it
    until it expires, even if you and the other side both want to end
    it.

## Get more information or help {#get-more-information-or-help-5}

-   Read about ending a protective order in What to Do if Someone Files
    a Protective Order Against You.

-   Learn about Services for People Who Commit Domestic Violence.

{%p endif %}

{%p if respond_change_end_po_against_me_TF %}

# Respond to a request to modify, dissolve, or extend the protective order {#respond-to-a-request-to-modify-dissolve-or-extend-the-protective-order}

##  Pick the right form {#pick-the-right-form-9}

-   If 1 person received the protective order, fill out Response to
    Request to Modify, Extend, or Dissolve a Protective Order (one
    petitioner).

-   If more than 1 person received the protective order, fill out
    Response to Request to Modify, Extend, or Dissolve a Protective
    Order (multiple petitioners).

## Fill out the form {#fill-out-the-form-9}

-   Fill out the top of the form with the information on the request.

-   Check boxes telling the court:

    -   you are the respondent,

    -   whether you are responding to a request to modify, extend, or
        > dissolve the protective order, and

    -   whether you agree with or oppose the request.

-   Complete, sign, and date the rest of the form.

## File the form {#file-the-form-9}

-   Make a copy for your records.

-   File the original with the court.

-   The court clerk will send a copy to the petitioner so you do not
    need to serve the petitioner yourself.

## Follow the protective order {#follow-the-protective-order-6}

You must follow the protective order until the court signs an order
changing it or you risk getting arrested.

-   The court may or may not hold a hearing.

-   If the court signs a new order, you will get a copy.

-   If there is a separate criminal case against you that prohibits you
    from contacting the other person, do not contact that person or you
    risk getting arrested.

-   If the court does not change the protective order, you must follow
    it until it expires, even if you and the other side both want to
    change it.

## Get more information or help {#get-more-information-or-help-6}

-   Read What to Do if Someone Files a Protective Order Against You.

-   Learn about Services for People Who Commit Domestic Violence.

{%p endif %}

{%p if no_to_change_order_against_me_TF %}

# Review tips for when someone has a protective order against you {#review-tips-for-when-someone-has-a-protective-order-against-you}

## Follow all court orders {#follow-all-court-orders-1}

One incident can result in several different court cases and more than
one order not to contact the other person.

-   If the police arrested you, you may have a criminal case.This is
    separate from the protective order case.

-   If you violate the protective order, the police may arrest you.This
    would be a new criminal case separate from any other criminal case
    or the protective order case.

-   Each case might have different restrictions on what you can or
    cannot do.You must follow all of them or risk getting arrested for a
    new crime of violating one of the orders.

-   If the protective order is dismissed, that does not end the other
    cases.You must still follow all orders in the other cases.

-   Be sure you understand what each order requires so you do not
    violate any of them.

## Get more information {#get-more-information-7}

-   Learn more by reading What to Do if Someone Files a Protective Order
    Against You*.*

-   Learn about Services for People Who Commit Domestic Violence.

{%p endif %}

{%p if short_term_wants_nothing_else_TF %}

# Review information for when you already have a protective order {#review-information-for-when-you-already-have-a-protective-order}

Based on your answers, we have provided resources to help you stay safe,
above.

If something changes and you want more information about protective
orders, you can use the Guided Assistant again.

{%p endif %}
